there are a lot of sources of gossip
innuendo and misinformation here on the
internet
one of the most powerful and one of the
most often overlooked is
fear some people make up stories they
make up explanations for things because
they're afraid in ancient times
people wanted to know what caused
thunder what caused lightning
what caused tornadoes and they made up
explanations that
really if you just think about it
carefully don't make sense
fundamentally cannot make sense they're
neither true nor false
but nonsensical and something similar
goes on here on youtube
in the 21st century with people who want
to believe they understand
the reasons for and the mechanisms
behind
censorship here on youtube and we are
specifically
and especially talking about soft
censorship
right not the outright banning of videos
not the
right deletion of videos not the right
deletion of your whole channel
because at least you get an email
explaining to you what happened and why
when that happened
but the curious position you're in as a
youtube content creator
when one video is more successful than
another when one video mysteriously
never seems to reach its potential
audience
and again the most sympathetic thing i
can say to the people who are making up
these
frankly irrational explanations for how
youtube works
the most sympathetic thing i can say is
i understand their delusions are fueled
by fear if you rely on youtube as your
source of income
you're afraid you can't pay your rent
you're afraid you're going to make less
money than you're expecting next month
maybe for a couple of months you made an
okay income and now all of a sudden
you're not making enough income fear
if you're not even on that level maybe
you're not making a dime out of youtube
or
someone like me who makes just a hundred
dollars a month it's a symbolic amount
of money on youtube
nevertheless you may be afraid about
your own wasted efforts you put a lot of
time and effort
into a certain video research editing
performance what have you
and you feel like that video
mysteriously didn't reach the audience
it could have reached or should have
reached because of soft censorship
because of what you imagine
shadow banning to be now when people
talk about this for the most part
they're not youtubers
most parts members of the audience who
talk to me about this
and i often challenge them to define
precisely what it is they mean
by terms like shadow banning and most
time they can't do it
they can't actually answer the question
tell you precisely
what shadow banning means now they know
what it means when your
video gets deleted or when your channel
gets deleted you know that the extreme
end
of youtube censorship but the moderate
end they have trouble
quantifying and we can quantify it i'm
going to tell you
right now what shadow banning really
means i'm going to compare
two videos that were uploaded at about
the same time on my
channel and they managed to reach the
same number of viewers the same number
of thumbs up
the difference is the number of
impressions
they received i'm going to tell you what
that means in just a second so here's a
video on my channel
that got to 2300
viewers and you will notice that it is a
very politically provocative title
it's exactly the sort of thing youtube
likes to censor that youtube likes to
restrict
the the viewership for okay but
nevertheless and
we'll talk about that too it reached
views it has 130 thumbs up there's no
evidence the thumbs up
matter for this equation but i'm just
mentioning in terms of the audience's
level of interest
what have you but the number of
impressions
this video with its politically
provocative title received
was only 12 811.
okay
what are impressions this
is the measure of how many times youtube
advertised your video within its own
ecosystem
how much advertising and promotion
youtube is affording your video
here on youtube within youtube
now some of you might say okay how can
you complain 12
000 that's a really high number i'm
going to compare this to a video that
didn't have a politically provocative
title and you'll see the difference so
that's one thing
keep in mind i have 11 000
subscribers so when i get this number
even if that seems positive hey
12 000 impressions all of those
impressions
all 12 000 could be youtube
advertising my video to people who
already are my subscribers
or there's another category people who
haven't subscribed
but people have already clicked on two
three or four of my videos people who
are regular viewers
or repeat viewers even if they're not
subscribers now if you're a regular user
of youtube even if you don't upload
you have probably experienced this
there's a certain channel
and you clicked on three or four of
their videos at some point and then as
you navigate the rest of the youtube
ecosystem as you're in other places
on youtube youtube is recommending to
you it's advertising to you
new videos so that's exactly what we're
discussing here all right
so i mean this ain't rocket science all
right now here is a youtube
video i made with a totally
non-politically provocative
title talking about jenna marbles
talking about i mean
the video actually is somewhat
politically provocative if you watch the
whole thing it's a little bit edgy a
little bit insightful
a little bit disturbing this reached
viewers if you count almost identical
but how many impressions
did this video receive this video
received 32
726 impressions
32 000. so the number of times this
video was
advertised within the youtube ecosystem
vastly greater even though it reached
exactly the same number of viewers
we have approximately the same number of
thumbs up all the other factors are the
same
and the difference is one video is uh
politically offensive i don't know how
to put it politically challenging
it's the kind of content youtube is
discouraging it's the kind of content
youtube is if you want to use the term
shadow banning right and the other is
this sort of
safe nambi pamby commentary content
that youtube implicitly or explicitly
encourages
us to upload right that is the sole
difference and that
is the measurable quantitative reality
of so-called shadow banning now there's
a counter argument here
the videos did in effect
reach the same number of viewers why and
how
because the video with the provocative
title
people cared about it people shared the
link
the good thing about youtube censorship
is that we can overcome it you can have
your own website
outside of youtube you can have your own
blog your fans
can share the link to your video on
facebook
through reddit just through email they
can send the link
to friends of theirs who would be
interested
fans sharing the link outside of youtube
is
really the lifeblood of youtube in 2020
that is what you
absolutely critically rely on for your
success
and the analytics system most of the
time
not always if you're a creator it shows
you these sources of success
so to give an example i've done several
videos recently
talking about the disadvantages of
playing video games why as an adult you
should quit playing video games or why
you shouldn't be a video game addict
this type of theme
one of those videos was much more
successful than the others it reached a
larger audience
why not because of impressions not
because of shadow banning not for this
issue at all
when you click through the analytics you
could see someone
had shared the link to a reddit group
and a thousand people or something that
read a group were interested and talked
about it and clicked on the video and
carried on a discussion
sharing the link with people who aren't
interested doesn't help sharing it to a
random reddit group doesn't help
but somebody i don't know who it wasn't
me shared this link with a group of
people who were interested they
discussed it that overcomes
whatever so-called system of shadow
banning or censorship is involved here
if people want to see the video if
people want to share the link to the
video
it still will reach an audience now
again i have some sympathy
for the people who have this fear-based
mentality
who are spinning out you know one new
myth after another about how youtube
censorship works
uh and you know how shadow banning how
these other phenomena may be
restricting their their their own career
but i'd really warn you as strongly as i
possibly can
this is very similar to a religious
mentality
for centuries educated people in modern
western europe
would interpret what happened with the
weather as the will of god
it's mind-blowing if you just read
historical non-fiction if you read
quotations from these people
people who when there was hail they read
that as an act of god when there was a
good harvest
that was an act of god when there was a
bad harvest there was nothing about any
phenomena good or bad could be
interpreted as the will of god
and then it's especially disturbing when
you get into war and politics
well you know the the british defeated
the spanish
in this particular battle so clearly
that shows they say that
god was on their side that god favors
british protestantism
over spanish catholicism really zero
irony
historically people believe this people
talk about this this self-justifying way
of interpreting
the facts of history but then of course
if the opposite happens
when the spanish win a battle or the
spanish win a whole war they say well
god is rebuking us because you know we
were on an ego trip we needed to be
humbled
and they'll find quotations in the bible
but that kind of thing any
possible empirical experience can be
reinterpreted
in light of the mythology once you've
already committed to believing in the
mythology
and the same thing happens here on
youtube whether you're talking about
gabby hannah
whether you're talking about small
youtubers like me you can interpret
your success as being granted to you by
this magical
algorithm and you can interpret your
failure as being granted you by this
magical algorithm and the truth is
the algorithm doesn't exist the truth is
that when you engage in prayer you're
just
talking to yourself i am a content
creator
i have some sympathy for my fellow
content creators and their
complaints in the setting but let's keep
it all the way real
youtube is just a website
within the last couple of days we had a
very powerful
example of advertiser activism
when suddenly out of the blue
the washington redskins agreed
to change the name of the team it's an
overtly
racist and offensive name for a sports
team
for at least 50 years people have been
saying they should change the team name
probably it's more than 50 years
that enlightened minds have been urging
them to change the name
the man who is still the ceo the lead
executive for the sports team he has
said on the record many many times in
recent years that he supports the
tradition he wants to keep the name the
same
do you know why he changed his mind
because a group of
advertisers got together and told him
jointly
if you don't change the name of the team
we're canceling all our advertisements
we're canceling all our promotions we're
canceling all sponsorship deals
we're going to walk out if you don't
change the name of this team
youtube faces this same kind of pressure
youtube has had to face the concerted
efforts
of advertisers of advertiser activism
who said to youtube
either you play by our rules either you
clean up your content
or we are going to leave now there's
more than one thing you can do
in those negotiations i'm not saying
youtube made the right decision not at
all i think youtube has made
terrible strategic decisions but the
solution here ultimately
is to have competitors to youtube who
are going to play the game
by different rules i think there should
be some websites that are
more censored than youtube where they
guarantee you that every video on the
website is appropriate for children
8 to 11 years old like it's super super
censored
so that kids can watch and i think there
should be another competitor to youtube
that allows nudity and frank discussion
of sexuality
and another competitor to youtube that's
allows
uh political discourse more freely
including footage
of war zones what have you you know
i think we need more than one solution
to this problem freedom of speech is not
some simple problem that's going to have
one policy or one answer there are going
to be many different ways
to pose the question in many different
ways to come to productive answers
as much as i may have sympathy for my
fellow content creators
i also can kind of have sympathy for the
devil here i also can have sympathy for
youtube
and realize that if i had been put in
their position
i would be struggling to come to some
kind of similar
compromise how do you feel about people
propounding flat earth theory on youtube
youtube has admitted basically in
various kinds of interviews
and statements that magazines would have
that that is an example of something
they discourage in this sense in the
sense i just showed you
this is shadow band that now propounding
crazy conspiracy theories that are
actually harmful and scientifically
untrue
like flat earth theory that this is in
this sense
shadow band it's not encouraged it's not
promoted on youtube anymore because they
felt this was
getting out of control how do you feel
about youtube channels that encourage
people to eat a
100 meat diet youtube channels that say
to you dead serious
that you can be healthy and beautiful
and strong you can lose weight and feel
great
eating nothing but ribeye steak water
and vodka
yes i'm thinking of a particular
extremely popular youtube channel that
sells and promotes this diet
that diet that diet will literally kill
you
are you going to allow that are you
going to allow a youtube channel that
tells people they can drink poison
where where do you draw the line at what
point is health advice
so dangerous and so unscientific that
you
if you were the ceo of youtube that you
would be willing to shadowband it
i am not saying that youtube drew the
line in the correct or appropriate place
i'm just saying it's inevitable that
somebody
has to draw the line if you want to beat
youtube
if you want to support content creators
like me there's a really simple way to
win
share the links to our videos outside of
youtube
whether that be in facebook groups
reddit groups or by email if you want
more people
to see the content you care about if you
want to support the future
of this channel that's all you got to do
copy and paste the url
share the link outside of youtube